[Music]
welcome to my deutsche digest 2 my
introduction to the philosophy of david
deutsch i guess i'm subtitling this one
deutsche discoveries david deutsch is
among many things physicist philosopher
first and foremost i guess
an unusually prolific creative mind
as popper admonished us to do we should
find a problem and fall in love with it
until we solve it and then find to our
delight a whole family of daughter
problems for us to love
now it seems to me david deutsch has
been an exemplar of this way of meeting
life and finding the joy in it
and moving from problem to problem and
finding ways of integrating them
together
into a larger whole david deutsch
invented the theory of quantum
computation he created the first quantum
algorithm deutsches algorithm which
could be run on a quantum computer and
demonstrate how much more powerful
quantum computers
are for certain tasks he discovered key
insights into the structure of the
multiverse and how to explain concepts
like fungibility
and entanglement in the context of
realistic quantum theory
we could list many scientific
contributions that david deutsch has
made
to physics and elsewhere but as before
i'm going to put aside
all the physics because as i've already
said that's a separate project all in
itself
here i'm going to mention more of david
deutsch's philosophical discoveries
one the function of evidence
the function of evidence is to decide
between theories already guessed
or we might also say evidence is there
to be explained
it's the explicandom that which is to be
explained
my trope example here is eddington's
1919 experiment
in 1919 there was still a question about
which
theory of gravity was superior newton's
universal law of gravity couched in
terms of an inverse square gravitational
force
or einstein's general theory of
relativity couched in terms of
space-time
in 1919 during a total solar eclipse
which is when the sun is obscured by the
moon
turning the sky almost completely dark
the stars come out the stars can be seen
now starlight passing close to the sun
will be bent by the gravity of the sun
eddington's experiment set newton's
theory which said the starlight would be
bent by
x amount against einstein's which said y
amount
the experiment ruled in favor of
einstein's that
is the function of evidence that is
always the function of evidence
evidence does not support theories it
does not support
einstein now as being correct any more
than the evidence prior to 1919
supported newton's theory as being
correct
david deutsch has really tried to
emphasize this in his philosophy
which brings me to two the quantum
multiverse is
testable it's a testable theory it is
absolutely astonishing to me that in
physics
and that's quite a claim because there
are many astonishing things in physics
that physicists themselves including
quantum physicists
seem not to understand how it is that
the everettian view of quantum theory
that's the multiverse to you and me is
testable
and indeed has been tested now the
equations of quantum theory predict what
happens during a double slit experiment
photons are expected to strike
everywhere possible
which makes a pattern like this when a
single one
is fired at the screen but we only ever
observe a single dot
we don't observe the pattern after
firing one photon
but that's fine because copies of us
see it land elsewhere if we were in a
single universe and there were no other
copies and no photons in other universes
we should expect the same point to be
hit over and over again on the screen
that's what science tells us that's what
repeatability of an experiment is all
about
getting the same result over and over
again but we don't get the same result
do we
over time we see a pattern build up
which pattern the very pattern that we
would expect if we lived in a multiverse
because we don't live in a single
universe
this is the only known explanation of
these observations
we've ruled out refuted any single
universe theory
now if you are not convinced and you
think there is still some other
interpretation
of quantum theory then we need to await
the possibility of conducting deutsche's
other multiverse test to rule out those
other interpretations
almost all those other interpretations
that differ from this
multiverse explanation are termed
collapse theories
these are theories that say all the
other possibilities
vanish upon the act of observation it is
called collapse because in technical
language the mathematical formulae
governing this situation
called the wave function is said to
collapse onto one value
what causes that collapse according to
those people observation
so what we need is an observer that can
conduct an interference experiment in
their own mind
such they can observe multiple states
that interfere simultaneously
now the long and short of this is that
if the observation destroys the
interference effect the multiverse has
ruled
out but if the conscious observer is
able to report
that they made only one observation when
the laws say many possibilities actually
existed in parallel
and then subsequently interference
occurs we know
that the claim about one observation was
being made by multiple observers in
multiple universes
before they interfered and became
fungible again
wow well that's all very dense and for
more you should watch my final episode
on the multiverse all about that because
it does
take some explaining but for now for my
deutsche discoveries here and now
understand that david deutch is the
first to have come up with an
experimental test
of evaretti and quantum theory and a
philosophical defense
of the ways in which the existing
experiments
are indeed only explicable in terms of
the multiverse
all of this should be more widely known
three
all evils are caused by insufficient
knowledge this really
is a special case of problems are
soluble
not all problems are an evil many can be
fun physicists find
physics problems fun gymnasts find the
problem of improving their routines fun
but no one would find anything fun nor
life worth living if there was nothing
to do
as david has said an unproblematic state
is one without creative thought
its other name is death death two is an
evil which makes it a problem
and a soluble one the death of humans or
indeed any life form does
not appear in the laws of physics there
is no physical law preventing
immortality
we simply need to repair the damage done
at a rate faster
than entropy erodes us now this claim
about evil
clearly links morality to epistemology
evils include disease
if we knew of the cure for cancer we'd
be rid of that evil
so too for viruses bacterial infections
the slow degradation of our organs
especially our brains all of that is an
evil to be solved
starvation and evil crop failure and
evil hurricanes earthquakes floods all
evils which
if we knew more we could prevent either
their occurrence
or the damage they do we want to know
what knowledge to pursue
to solve our problem what should we do
next that actually
brings me to what should we do next this
is a way of couching the central
question of morality
morality as what to do next is a way
deutsch conceives of morality
different to almost all other moral
philosophers
those other moral philosophies
deontology
virtue ethics utilitarianism natural law
all of which can be put aside into the
same category
as being more or less useful ways and
means of criticizing
any moral claim of what to do next
if your theory of what to do next causes
great suffering and no joy anywhere
well a utilitarian or ticologist is
right to complain
if your theory of what to do next
requires you to act in an unjust or
dishonest way
the religious and the philosophical
right to object what deutsch
adds to this conception is that none of
those systems of morality
grand as they may be need be a
foundation
the be-all and end-all the final no
matter what word
for that error is the error of
foundationalism
and it is as wrong in morality as it is
in physics or biology
there is no final word there's no need
to go searching for a foundation
there's no need to look for the
foundation underpinning all of our moral
choices any more than there is to find a
foundation
beneath all of our physics what we're
looking for is merely incremental
improvements to what we already know
and what we already know serves as an
important bulwark
against claims both spurious and
possibly useful
and as a way of distinguishing between
virtue and evil
just as an aside here i should address
the fact that david deutsch actually
is someone who works at the foundations
of physics but this does not make him a
foundationalist there is no
contradiction here he's looking for the
deepest theories
not the final answer so he's
incrementally improving our
understanding of the deepest
levels of physics now construct a theory
incrementally by improving on what's
gone before let's say
quantum computation but this does not
mean that he thinks
for example constructor theory will be
the final word
it'll just be better than the other
words that have gone before
4. the mathematician's misconception
a profound and subtle idea about the
relationship between mathematics
physics and epistemology is the
mathematician's misconception
mathematics is about necessary truth as
david writes in the fabric of reality
necessary truth is the subject matter of
mathematics
not the reward we get for doing
mathematics what we know is always prone
to error we are prone to making mistakes
what we know about the laws of physics
is this quantum theory puts a strict
barrier before us on perfection
even if one did not endorse literal
quantum theory people know that matter
is subject to change in random ways even
the second law of thermodynamics can
give you that
systems decay they change over time
computers can make errors
when a mathematician completes a proof
many think that this means the
conclusion is
certain without error after all it's
been proved
many take this synonymous with therefore
it's absolutely true
it's incontrovertible but this is not
the case
any proof a mathematician does is a kind
of computation
not just kind of computation kind of a
computation it's a computation
it's something a brain does in some
cases a calculator a computer
and brains calculators computers are
made of matter obeying physical laws and
those physical laws
mandate imperfection not perfection
errors can be corrected sure but no
process can be guaranteed to be
error-free
therefore any proof being a computation
is only as reliable as the laws of
physics permit the computer be it a
human brain or a calculator to be
error is always part of the picture the
mathematician's misconception
is that the process in mathematics can
somehow stand apart
from the physics that they can tap into
some kind of
divine source of truth but even if they
were a divine source of truth
even if we granted that the tapping in
process
is itself a physical one and therefore
subject to
all the same kinds of errors any abacus
eroding stone or jet engine is
the laws of physics thermal fluctuations
subjective quantum randomness the
imperfections of the real world
in short the mathematician's
misconception is this
mathematical proof is independent of the
laws of physics
deutsch has explained that it is not
that
is a real contribution to the
foundations of the philosophy of
mathematics and epistemology
so our knowledge of mathematics is not
mathematics itself
in the same way our knowledge of the
laws of physics are not the final
ultimate laws of physics themselves
we expect to find errors eventually
everywhere and that is actually a good
thing it means progress
continues indefinitely
[Music]
[Applause]
you